Add post on translations team and project (#229)
scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org: content/posts/scientific-python/translations/index.md

---

> title: "Setting up and managing translations for Scientific Python projects"

Reviewer: The title is quite long, perhaps consider simply "Translations for Scientific Python projects" or "Managing translations for Scientific Python projects".

date: 2024-08-08
draft: false
tags:
  [
    "Scientific-Python",
    "translations",
    "inclusion",
    "CZI",
  ]
description: "Setting up and managing translations for Scientific Python projects."
displayInList: true

> author: ["Melissa Mendonça", "Albert Steppi", "Tania Allard", "Ralf Gommers", "Stéfan van der Walt", "Jarrod Millman"]

Reviewer: You don't need to include me as an author; you did all the work!

Reviewer 2: +1 same here. I think the author of this blog post is either just you Melissa, or you and Albert if it was a collaboration on the content.

---

> In November 2022, [the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) awarded the Scientific Python project with a grant to improve communications infrastructure and accessibility](https://blog.scientific-python.org/scientific-python/2022-czi-grant/). This proposal involves several key areas to improve sustainability, inclusivity and accessibility of the Scientific Python ecosystem. One of these areas is making software documentation and user interfaces available in multiple languages. We are happy to announce that we are now able to develop and publish translations of multiple project websites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In November 2022, [the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) awarded the Scientific Python project with a grant to improve communications infrastructure and accessibility](https://blog.scientific-python.org/scientific-python/2022-czi-grant/). This proposal involves several key areas to improve sustainability, inclusivity and accessibility of the Scientific Python ecosystem. One of these areas is making software documentation and user interfaces available in multiple languages. We are happy to announce that we  have developed the necessary infrastructure and process to allow translating multiple project websites.
```

The suggested wording should probably not used as-is. The gist of what I'm suggesting is making it clear that you have built the *capacity* to translate websites, not that you've translated several websites.

Author: Makes sense! Will rephrase.

> In this blog post, we will discuss how we set up and plan to manage translations for Scientific Python projects in collaboration with Quansight Labs, and how you can participate in the translation and localization effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we will discuss how we set up and manage translations for Scientific Python projects, and how you can participate in the translation and localization effort. The work described here was done by Quansight Labs.
```

Two suggestions here: (1) keep the text on what the blog post is together and (2) give more explicit credit to Quansight for conducting the work.

## Why translations are important

> Accessibility and inclusion are important aspects of software development, and it is important that we focus on them when considering the global reach of our open-source projects and communities. By providing translations of our websites, documentation and user interfaces in multiple languages, we can reach a wider audience and make our projects more inclusive. This is especially important for scientific software projects, which are used by researchers and scientists from around the world with a wide range of language proficiencies and backgrounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessibility and inclusion are important aspects of building a healthy community around open source software development. By providing translations of our websites, documentation and user interfaces in multiple languages, we reach a wider global audience, thereby making our projects more inclusive and increasing the diversity of contributions and ideas. This is especially important for scientific software projects, used by researchers and scientists from around the world with a wide range of language proficiencies and backgrounds.
```

This is mainly general edits, with a minor added emphasis on what we gain through diversity: healthier community, diversity of ideas.

> Recently, the development of machine translation tools has made it easier to translate content into multiple languages. These tools can be useful for a quick look, but in reality they are often more distracting than informative in many contexts, including technical documentation. In addition, without a human in the loop, maintainers can never be sure if they are publishing the right content in languages they are not familiar with. For this reason, we have chosen to work with a group of human translators to help us translate content for the projects' websites and documentation when appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recently, machine translation tools have made it easier to translate content into multiple languages. While such tools are improving, they often fall short in the context of technical documentation. In addition, without a human in the loop, maintainers can never be sure if translated content is correct for languages they are not familiar with. For this reason, we chose to work with a group of volunteers to translate selective subsets of project websites and documentation.
```

## Setting up translations workflow

You may have seen that translations into some languages are already available for [numpy.org](https://numpy.org), with a version switcher in the top right corner.

![Screenshot of the numpy.org site in Japanese, with a version switcher in the top right corner showing the English and Portuguese language options.](numpyorg.png)

A number of core projects have also joined this effort and are set up to start with translations. At the moment, we are targeting [NumPy](https://numpy.org), [SciPy](https://scipy.org), [NetworkX](https://networkx.org), [Xarray](https://xarray.dev), and [pandas](https://pandas.org). We're offering to help other core projects integrate something similar into their websites, and we aim to accomplish this in a way that requires minimal effort from the core project maintainers, using [Crowdin](https://scientific-python.crowdin.com). 

> For the moment, our scope is to translate only the projects' websites -the landing pages you see when you check out the links above- and **not** full documentation. We are intentionally starting small with the goal of completing this first phase and then potentially expanding once the translations team is established.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the moment, our scope is to translate only the projects' websites—the landing pages you see when you check out the links above—and **not** full documentation. We are intentionally starting small with the goal of completing this first phase and then potentially expanding once the translations team is established.
```

Add em-dashes.

## Translations team

> For new contributors who are looking to get involved in the projects they already use and depend on, joining the translations team can be a great way to get started. Because of how the translations infrastructure is set up in Crowdin, this workflow is particularly well-suited for new contributors who are not yet familiar with GitHub or other development tools - they can work entirely on the Crowdin web platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For new contributors who are looking to get involved in the projects they already use and depend on, joining the translations team can be a great way to get started. Because of how the translations infrastructure is set up in Crowdin, this workflow is particularly well-suited for new contributors who are not yet familiar with GitHub or other development tools—they can work entirely on the Crowdin web platform.
```

Add em-dash.

> One advantage of setting this up at the Scientific Python level and not on a per project basis is that the translations team can work on multiple projects, and knowledge and experience can be shared. This also helps to ensure that translations are consistent across projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One advantage of setting this up at the Scientific Python level, and not on a per-project basis, is that the translations team can work on multiple projects, and knowledge and experience can be shared. This also helps to ensure that translations are consistent across projects.
```
